layout: post
title:  "The Will of God, or Letter to my Mother"
date:   2025-07-19 02:51:00 -0400
author: "heath evan martin"
tags: [spirituality, philosophy, family, god, free-will, surrender]The Will of God, or Letter to my MotherAfter talking with you just now... the thing I was trying to tell you at the end... I had a clear image afterwards of why the thing I think I'm trying to tell you is always off center and missing the mark, never connecting. And it came with a feeling of how it could be picked up and placed cleanly right on the mark, all in one go. Like it had a 'thereness' and 'thisness' that made it easy to see how to correct it. And all of a sudden I felt the line of tension on my left get let-go-of for a second, and same with the tension in my center-back. And I'm going to keep exploring it because this always signals the end of a cycle of stress and tension and all the lessons learned, or I should say, all the many ways I've learned the hard way not-to-be.I don't hate you and I don't think you were a bad mother. And I don't blame you for anything about my life that I might complain about or even at a time may have hated about myself or life. I have, however, struggled to understand myself and my life and why I act or think or feel in ways that it seems I can't escape (though, gradually, slowly, in time that feels measured in eons, I do) and which weren't up to me, but front-loaded so to speak, by chance of time or place or birth or material accident, or a butterfly flapping it's wings across the earth, or whatever....Point is... this life is both 'up to me' and 'not up to me', and same for you and everyone else down the line. Bemoaning ones life or shifting responsibility to ones parents or past or circumstances is a willing refusal to see God's will, or to see God at all. Because it is the assumption that one is already a kind of god, but a better kind.. the kind that knows what one's life should be like or which one of a leaf's faces should be up and which down. And it is hubris that can be extended very far to an extreme of actual, delusional, psychopathic and self destructive mental illness [the author speaks autobiograpghically from personal life experience]...but only that far, because only God is infinite. It's the mind's insistence that it can contain God which is the source of the delusion. And it's the source of the pain in my mind and body as well -- which is not tension that's there and must go, but something that I grasp willingly and fiercely of my own free will. But I'm forgetful, often for months or years at a time. And every letting go is a remembering: of a life and world that was here before me, and of a purpose that I understand the way a point in a field understands a complex multidimensional mathematical paradox, or the pen and ink that dotted it, or the color blue. And the only place to rest is in this world that was already here...but I keep forgetting... that's the problem.To surrender completely to the will of God is to find this here and now and just stay there -- by choice. It's perfect peace and freedom in the obvious way that if you're not grasping on to heavy things anymore you're not limited to how they would move or restrict you. Instead you're left with the cleanest slate of all: the world that was already here but transparent to you until now.When you surrender, You gain a measure of true and actual insight and the most freedom that can be had --and this is desirable-- but you also are recoiling constantly from it in terrified spasmodic aversion of the magnitude and weight of not-up-to-youness that it presents and the terrible burden of free will you have in light of the Unknowable.It brings rest from a weary mind and soul, yes --it is the bosom of God, after-all, and always at rest relative to All Other Things. But being at rest in this way it is surrounded by the infinite shapes and points of an always spinning world you can never control or contain - they're God's dice and he threw them infinity-ago and always and continuously, both prior to you and external to your agency and being in all ways. It both shows you how small you are and allows you to finally rest, but also exposes the majesty and magnitude of your own free will. For though your world becomes vast and contains all things that are real and not fantasy, this world is not up to you, and so you do not know how to act, nor could you, because you are the author only of what is within your immediate grasp -- and Everything Else devours you.This is the recoiling, then. It's a seeking safety in control and a grasping on-to. It's holding on for dear life because the Bosom of God, or the restful here and now, feels more like it would be a vicious whitewater river propelling you over a waterfall or into a void. It signals the death of you, because to surrender means accepting responsibility for all things that confront you, and this is All Things, at least All Things which confront you now, no matter how meager they may be or how mundane or how few -- they're still your whole world, everywhere all at once, now, always, and forever, and this is oh so very scary mommy wah 😭 wah I'm a little crying baby 🍼......
